Collection of Modula-2 to C/C++ Transpilers.
a)Umberto_Salsi_M2/
 Umberto Salsi wrote and published a Modula-2 compiler. The system builds on Linux systems. Here is a short description from the homepage: "Basically, M2 is a cross compiler from the M2 language to C. Array and dynamic structures are allocated automatically and deallocated when no more needed. The run-time checking prevent array index overflow and null-pointer dereferencing, so improving the robustness of the program. All the programmer must take care of is the algorithm, all the rest is in charge of the language." License: "The M2 language and the M2 developing system are released under a BSD-style license (see the file LICENSE for details). The M2 compiler generates C source compilable with the gcc compiler, released under the GNU GPL license. Some of the C libraries used by gcc are part of the GNU operating system and are released under the GNU GPL license."
URL http://www.icosaedro.it/m2/index.html
b) MTC
Mtc translator: Modula2 to C translator by Josef Grosch and Matthias Martin. The description says it produces readable (!) code. Mtc implements the language Modula-2 as defined in N. Wirth's report (3rd edition) with a few minor restrictions and most language extensions implemented by MOCKA, the Modula-2 Compiler Karlsruhe. It produces K&R (not ANSI) C code with a few very common extensions like passing structures as value parameters. Mtc is intended as a tool for translating finished programs from Modula-2 to C and not as a tool for program development. Therefore, the translator does not check the semantic correctness of the Modula-2 programs
c) Sinuhe_M2C/
Sinuhe's Modula-2 (M2) compiler and translator to C is a fork of m2c-0.6, a program originally written by Vladimir Mkarov. Mr. D. E. Evans, who has kindly decided to keep this program alive summarizes: "Bug fixes have been made to the standard library, the code base has been cleaned up for c99 builds, architecture support has been improved and simplified, and an improved coroutine module has replaced the previous." m2c is free software covered by GNU General Public License Version 2. A ready to install RPM package is available from the homepage. The original docs inform about the platforms this package was originally tested on: Vax/Ultrix, i386/Linux, Sparc/SunOS4.1 and Alpha/OSF3.x; The translator supports PIM4 and PIM3 Modula-2.
URL http://nongnu.org/m2c/
d) M2_to_Cpp/
C2 - a Modula-2 to C++ translator was written in 2000/2001 by Dr. Milos Radovanovic. Description by the author: "What it does is take a single Modula-2 source program, check its lexis and syntax, and output a (hopefully) correct C++ program. It is probably not something every Modula-2 programmer ever dreamed about, but more a collection of ideas I had and my determination to get them to compile right."
URL https://perun.pmf.uns.ac.rs/radovanovic/downloads.htm
