                    ABOUT THE TEST SET


    Test set for Modula-2 compiler is designed to check a
reaction of compiler if the source program text contains a
single error. A single error is a case when in a program only
one explicit requirement of language is violated.  Therefore
the order of tests corresponds the structure of language
report.

     The test name (without extension) contains the word
"test" for main module or the word "add" for implementation
and definition modules; the rest of the name consists of
number of that section in the language report, which contains
an explicit requirement and number of the test inside
section.
                                                   
    The name component, which determines a number of the test
inside section, is a character ("a", "b", ...). Tests
connected with a same section have these characters added to
its names. For example

		 test10x1a.mod      is first test in section 10.1
       whereas 

		 test10x1b.mod      is  second one.
 
    Exception: test 14a consists of  two files - test14a1.mod
	       and test14a2.mod , and there is one additional 
               digit after character in its name.

       If test consists of more than one file then all these
files have the same number of section and the same number of
test inside section in its names. In this case the
information about test is located in main module if it
exists.

       Inside the test file the information about test is
located in comments. First comment defines the page number of
the language report in the form " p. number ". It also
defines the first and the last lines of the language report
containing the corresponding explicit requirement; if the
line number is counted from top of page then you can see "
number t - number t " , and if the line number is counted
from bottom of page then you can see " number b - number b "
. For example

           " 17b-15b "     means the lines between 17-th 

                           and 15-th lines from bottom.

       The second comment contains a topic ( header of
section ). The third comment contains an explicit
requirement. The fourth comment contains an error
description.

Sergey Katserov
